Hi, everybody.
Are we all happy?
All right.
I'm here to talk about LLVM.
I hope you're in the right place.
So my name is Chris Lattener.
I'm one of the people that
are hacking away in LLVM,
slaving away to make it
a great compiler for you.
Today's talk is actually a great talk
because we get to have several other
people that have been slaving away,
hacking away, making it awesome,
and they'll be talking more
about specific features.
So if you're here,
I assume that you probably
have some idea what LLVM is.
And a lot of you probably went to
the compiler state of the union,
so I'm going to skip over some
of the details of what it is.
To put it briefly, it's a compiler.
[Transcript missing]
So, one thing, again,
I want to emphasize is
that LLVM is open source.
And for our integration with Xcode,
one nice thing about LLVM is
that it uses a BSD license,
which means that you can use it in a
commercial project and you don't have,
you can use it in many
different ways that you can't
do with a GPL-like license.
And so, as we push forward,
we think this is really important.
This lets us do a lot of things with
LLVM that we wouldn't be able to
do if the licenses were different.
This is also great because a lot of
other companies have taken LLVM and
have done great things with it.
And if you go to the LLVM web page,
which is LLVM.org,
you can read about some of that.
Several companies that are
probably here are probably using
it and they may not know about it.
So, today I want to talk about LLVM-GCC,
or I want,
we will be talking about LLVM-GCC,
we'll be talking a lot more about Clang,
and we'll be talking about
applications of Clang.
So, this is old hat.
I think it's a little
bit of a different thing.
So,
a compiler is broken into three pieces,
the parser, the optimizer,
and the backend.
When you're using LLVM-GCC,
the backend and the optimizer come from
LLVM and the frontend comes from GCC.
The great feature of this is
that GCC does all the parsing,
which means if your code
parses with GCC 4.2,
it will parse with LLVM-GCC 4.2.
By changing the optimizer
and the backend,
we now get better performance,
lower compile times when the optimizer
is enabled and features like that.
So, later we'll be talking
significantly more about Clang,
talking about its architecture,
the implications for Xcode,
giving detailed timing
information and things like that.
It's a great project.
There's a huge amount of work going
on both by us and in the community,
and I'm really excited that
we'll be able to talk about that.
So, the overall roadmap for this talk
is we'll talk about LLVM-GCC 4.2.
This is on your Xcode 3.1 DVDs
and available on Snow Leopard.
And so, we'll talk about performance.
We'll talk about link time optimization,
how to get the most out
of link time optimization,
what you can do to your code.
After that, we'll talk about Clang.
Clang is this new frontend.
There's a whole broad
range of things we can do.
We think this is going to have a
huge impact on your build times.
It will let us do a lot of
exciting things with Xcode,
and we'll talk about that.
Finally,
we'll talk about applications of Clang.
And this is great stuff
that it's not shipping yet,
and Clang itself is
also not shipping yet.
But there's a huge amount of things
that you can do when you have a
compiler's view of the source code.
And with a compiler's
view of the source code,
you can do lots of fun things
and help find bugs in your code,
for example,
which is one we'll talk about in depth.
So,
this is enough of me up here blabbing.
I'd like to have Devang Patel come up.
Devang is, among other things,
the guy who implemented link
time optimization in LLVM-GCC.
So, Devang, please take it away.
Thanks, Chris.
Good afternoon.
I'm Devang, member of LLVM team at Apple.
Today, I'm going to describe how you
can use LLVM-gcc to help improve
performance of your application.
So, let's start.
LLVM-GCC is a drop-in replacement
for the GCC 4.2 compiler.
Both of the compilers
are binary compatible,
which means you can mix and match object
files generated by these two compilers.
LLVM-GCC supports C, C++, Objective-C,
and Objective-C++ languages.
It supports x86 32-bit as well as 64-bit.
LLVM-GCC also supports PowerPCs 32-bit,
but it doesn't support PowerPCs 64-bit.
LLVM-GCC is now available in Xcode 3.1.
LLVM-GCC supports all the standard
features supported by GCC 4.2 frontend.
In fact,
it takes advantage of some of the
features more than GCC itself.
How?
We'll see today.
LLVM-GCC also supports
link time optimization.
We'll discuss this in detail today.
This is our very first release.
In this release, OpenMP is not supported.
Debugging of optimized
code is also not supported.
Please read release notes
for more information.
So now you know that this
new compiler is available.
How do you use it?
It's very simple.
You can select this compiler
in Xcode's compiler drop-down
selection list in the build panel.
On the command line,
this compiler is installed inside
your Xcode installation folder.
If you have installed
Xcode in /developer,
then this compiler is available
at /developer/user/bin/llvm/gcc.
This compiler accepts all
GCC standard command line options.
So now you know you have a new compiler,
you can use it.
Why do you want to use it?
Well, one of the new features in this new
compiler is link time optimization.
You may ask,
what is link time optimization?
Well, traditionally,
when you compile your source file,
the compiler will generate
optimized object files.
Linker will take these object
files and link it together to
create your final application.
Now when the optimizer is
optimizing your source file,
it cannot see across the source file.
So the optimizer has to make
conservative assumptions.
Now what if you can do the
optimization at the link time,
where you can see everything?
This is known as link time optimization.
LLVM supports completely
transparent link time optimization,
which works across programming languages,
which means you can take a
C function from one source file
and you can align it in a C++
function in a second source file.
How does it work?
Well, it's very simple.
You compile your source file
using -o for the LLVM gcc.
The compiler will generate a .o file,
the linker will take that .o file
and link it together with other input
files to create your final binary.
However,
one thing new in this situation is the
.org file generated by the compiler
is not native Mac OS X object file.
In fact, it contains LLVM bitcode.
But don't worry.
Xcode 3.1 linker knows how
to handle LLVM bitcode files.
The linker will use the LLVM optimizer
to optimize all the available
LLVM bitcode files on the fly and
generate native Mac OS X object files,
which will be linked with other
object files on the input.
and others will be linked with other
object files to create the final binary.
If this sounds complicated,
then let's take a look at the example.
Here we have one simple source
file which defines two functions:
get_number, which returns one integer,
and we have a main that invokes
the external function do_something.
If you optimize this source file,
Using highest compile time optimization,
the optimizer will not
be able to do anything.
The code is already simplified.
Now let's take a look at
the second source file.
This source file has one
static variable flag,
which is modified by a
function called foobar.
And finally,
this source file defines do something
that is used by the first source file.
Once again, if you optimize this source
file using the highest
optimization available to you,
the optimizer doesn't have enough room
to do anything at the compile time.
The code is already in very simple form.
But what if we compile only one source
file using link time optimization?
The compiler will generate the
LLVM bitcode for this source file.
Linker will accept this source file.
The linker will accept
this LLVM bitcode file,
and it will ask the
optimizer to optimize it.
But linker will provide
some additional information.
Linker will inform the optimizer
that this function foobar
is not used anywhere else.
Second thing Linker will inform that
this function is hidden because we are
building a static application where only
one function is externally visible main.
Now this is very important.
If we are building a dynamic library,
then Linker will not
make this symbol hidden.
You will have to do it yourself by
using various visibility controls.
We'll see it in detail today.
So now, based on this information,
the function is not used anywhere else,
and it is hidden.
The optimizer will simply remove it.
Once this function is gone,
The optimizer will immediately recognize
that this condition is always false.
So it is safe to remove
this code as well.
Once this condition is gone,
the optimizer will recognize that
we have a static variable that is
initialized but not used anywhere else.
So we can remove that also.
Now the linker will join the fun.
Linker will realize that this
function is not used anywhere else,
so I can remove that one also.
The Xcode linker supports
date code stripping.
Now you can see that additional
information provided by the linker helped
optimizer to significantly optimize
this code which was not possible earlier.
But we are not done yet.
If we compile the first source file
using LLVM link time optimization
then the linker will provide both the
LLVM bit code file to the LLVM optimizer.
Now the optimizer will be able to
simply in line do something into
the main and you will get this.
This is the power of
link time optimization.
Before I wrap up this example,
I would like to point out two things.
Sometimes you cannot compile
everything in your project.
You may link libraries from third party,
but try to compile as much
as possible using -04.
More is better for the optimizer.
Second, as we saw with the foo bar
function in the example,
use visibility control
as much as possible.
Hide as many symbols as possible.
It has one additional advantage.
It will help you reduce your
application's launch time.
There are various ways you
can control symbol visibility.
You can use static variables,
you can use anonymous namespace in C++,
or you can use GCC's
visibility attributes.
or you can use exported
symbol list at the link time.
We have one excellent tech
note that describes everything.
It's very useful.
So now you want to know how
to use this new technology.
It is as simple as you would expect.
It's just a checkbox in
the Xcode's build panel.
On the command line,
you just use optimizations in level 04.
So, now let's look at the performance we
are gaining using this new technology.
Tuesday, Chris talked about the
performance improvements we
are seeing in H.264 decoder.
Today, we will look at the performance
for the SPEC 2000 benchmark.
This benchmark is a collection of C, C++,
and Fortran programs.
We are just focusing
on C and C++ programs.
We are comparing LLVM-GCC's
performance with respect to GCC 4.2.
Before we look at the numbers,
I would like to clarify two things.
Number one, we are measuring the relative
performance of two compilers.
We are not focusing on getting
the absolute base spec numbers
for the spec benchmark.
Second, your mileage may vary.
The
Your application may not see
the performance improvements we
are seeing in these benchmarks.
You should measure and analyze the
performance of your application.
So let's look at the performance number.
Here we are comparing the average
spec numbers for these two compilers,
gcc 4.2 and llvm-gcc 4.2 at
various optimization levels.
X axis represents the
optimization levels.
On the Y axis, we are representing the
relative performance.
If the performance is as good as,
which means if the average spec number
is as good as the average spec number
for gcc at optimization level O2,
then it's 100%. If it is more
than 100%, which means the
compiler is producing faster code,
which is good.
If it is less than 100%,
then it is not good.
So let's look at what the compiler
can do at optimization level O2.
At optimization level O2,
LLVM/GCC-produced code runs 5% faster.
We ask both the optimizers
to do additional work.
Let them aggressively inline your code,
which will enable further
optimization opportunities.
Well, both of them performed well.
However, once again,
LLVM GCC-produced code outperforms
the code produced by GCC.
You may ask,
what about link time optimization?
We looked at one carefully created
example and see what it can do,
but how about real-life
benchmark numbers?
We expect it to do better, but how much?
Well, we are getting 25% performance
improvement by turning on
link time optimization.
We do not have numbers for GCC at
O4 because GCC 4.2 doesn't support
link time optimization right now.
Now you may ask, okay, 25% performance
improvement is really good.
It's excellent.
But what's the cost?
Well, let's take a look at the compile
time numbers for this benchmark.
Here we are measuring how long does
it take to build this benchmark
at various optimization levels.
Once again,
we are comparing it with GCC 4.2
at optimization level O2.
If the compiler is building
this benchmark faster,
the number will be less
than 100%, which is good.
If the compiler is slower,
the number will be more than
100%, which is not good.
At optimization level O2,
LLVM-GCC is 30% faster than GCC.
And if you remember the previous slide,
it produced 5% better code.
Now, when we ask both the
optimizers to do more work,
they take longer.
But once again, LLVM-GCC is very,
very fast compared to GCC.
How about link time optimization?
As you know, at link time optimization,
we do all the work that we do at
the compile time optimization,
plus at the link time,
the optimizer works on entire
All entire object files in your project.
It's an extremely large dataset,
so I expect it to take longer.
But how much?
Well, it is almost as fast as
GCC at optimization level O2,
which is significant.
In other words, you are not spending any
extra time and you are getting
25% performance improvement.
So let's summarize the
performance numbers.
At optimization level O2,
LLVM GCC compiles 30% faster
and produces 5% better code.
At optimization level 04,
LLVM GCC is as fast as
GCC at optimization level 02,
but generates 25% better code.
But I'm not satisfied.
I want 25% better code and 30%
faster compiler at the same time.
Why not?
So what can we do?
Let's take a look at compile
time numbers once again.
We saw this slide.
When we collected these measurements,
there is one component that
is common in all measurements.
That is gcc 4.2 frontend.
llvm-gcc uses gcc 4.2 frontend.
So how much time is
spent in this frontend?
Now you can realize that
LLVM optimizer and code generators
are amazingly fast compared to
GCC optimizer and code generator.
In fact, at optimization level O2,
they are almost twice as fast as
GCC's optimizer and code generator.
So the obvious question I have is,
is it possible to use a faster front end?
I'm inviting Steve Naroff
to answer the question.
Thank you.
Thanks, Devang.
Hi, folks.
So I'm Steve Naroff,
and I work on Clang in the LLVM team.
I'm going to expand a little bit on the
tools old timer to give you some context.
It might help you understand
my perspective in the talk.
In the mid-'80s,
I was the tech lead on Objective-C,
and after that I went to work for
Next and implemented the GNU native
implementation of Objective-C,
and after that went on to
manage the tools effort at Next.
And while at Apple,
I've worked on several things like
Java and the PB to Xcode transition,
many different things.
So anyway, that's the old timer part,
mid-'80s.
And I'm here to talk about Clang.
So this talk is divided into
our motivation for Clang.
We'll talk about some goals.
We'll talk about some specific numbers.
And then we'll get a little bit into our
future plans for integrating with Xcode.
The number one motivation
we have is fast compilation.
Now, as Devang just mentioned,
the back end is actually quite fast,
even when generating really good code.
Realize that this is a huge innovation.
Most C compilers,
static C compilers like GCC,
when they were developed,
the people working on the back end really
didn't care about compile time at all.
Their main goal was
generating the best code,
and they didn't really care
how long it would take.
So it's really important that today,
when we want to use the
C compiler in a just-in-time
compilation mode or at runtime,
that the back end is quite fast.
And that has obviously a great side
effect on your development time.
So we're inspired in the Clang
front end to basically marry a great
fast front end with the LLVM back
end to give you fast compilation,
because compilation obviously
involves the front end and back end.
Another important motivation is many
C compilers don't really give you
great error diagnostics messages.
The messages that a compiler
spits out when you do something
bad is its user interface,
right?
That's the main UI the
compiler has to you is to tell
you what you've done wrong.
It doesn't say much if you've done right,
unfortunately.
It doesn't pat you on the back.
But it's really important that we
give you precise location information.
I'll show you a little bit more.
We'll talk more of that later.
And certainly we want to enable a
whole new class of programming tools.
Last year we introduced
refactoring in Xcode,
and it was surprisingly difficult to do.
We did it because it was important,
it's a great feature,
but we want Clang to make doing
refactoring and other great
programming tools really simple.
So one of the key goals here is to
make a drop-in replacement for GCC.
We would love to not implement
all the funky extensions in GCC,
but that's not pragmatic.
It's not pragmatic because Apple uses
GCC internally extensively,
as you know.
We compile our entire
operating system with it,
and we use a lot of these extensions.
And even -- there's some code
that doesn't even know it's using
extensions that is using extensions,
and we find that out later.
So it's interesting.
We really need to be
drop-in compatible with GCC,
and we're working really hard at
that and have implemented many
of the GCC features already.
Also we want language conformance.
Right now we're doing a great
job with C and Objective-C.
C++ is to come, and when we do C++,
it has to conform to the spec.
We're not going to be deviating at all.
One second, let me get some water.
So, as I said before,
we want to spur innovation
for the next decade.
I want to talk a little bit about
the open source community that
LLVM has and Clang is modeled after.
It's really progressive.
I use that word very specifically.
For instance,
when people talk about open source,
there's this feeling that, oh,
open source is good, right?
That if it's open source, it's good.
Well, just like with companies,
corporate cultures, teams,
there are good teams, bad teams,
good cultures, bad cultures.
And I think the community that the
LLVM community has is extremely friendly.
It's very open to change,
and it's very open to great engineering.
Okay?
So the leadership that's driving
LLVM and that we hope to drive Clang
is really concerned about making great
software because we feel that great
software can be optimized better,
can be extended, and more importantly,
can be extended by people who
aren't necessarily compiler.
Chris Latten, Devang Patel, Steve Naroff,
Ted Kremenek So a lot
of you use the language,
and if you wanted to develop an
extension to a tool we're providing,
since you know the language,
if we're giving you APIs to the function
objects and the statement objects,
you should be able to, in theory,
write your own refactorings
that are custom.
Okay?
A lot of the refactorings
we do today are canned,
so to speak.
We would like to offer a
much more extensible API.
If you wanted to do your own searching
browser that's custom to your tool,
you could do that.
There's many different things that are
exciting when you have an API that's
approachable by software engineers,
not necessarily compiler experts.
And we've been told by many people
who have downloaded Clang that the
API is really pleasant to work with.
So I guess I've already covered it.
Modularity is critical here.
We firmly believe that the
only way to really have great
performance is through great design.
And so we're sticking to that.
And, you know, as far as I'm concerned,
the C-based tools have stagnated, okay?
Xcode is wonderful considering
what it has to live with,
and I'm going to talk about that later.
But, um, uh,
It's just a shame that because
the C compilers that are in
use today were developed 25,
30 years ago,
that they've basically stunted the
growth of great development environments.
And we believe Clang can
basically do -- make a huge step
forward in enabling great IDs.
Obviously,
we're most concerned with Xcode,
but Clang can be used in
various other contexts.
A good example is Eclipse.
Many of you probably have heard
of Eclipse in the Java world.
Well,
it's an IDE that's written in Java and
that supports many different languages.
Well, it turns out that for Java,
Eclipse is a wonderful tool.
For C, it's less than wonderful.
And part of the reason is that
it uses GCC as its plugin.
And again, GCC was not developed
with modularity APIs,
extensibility, all that kind of stuff.
So anyway, we're excited about this.
I'm going to shift gears now and
talk a little bit about diagnostics.
Here's some code that is meaningless.
It's just for the example.
It has two statements there.
Now, when you compile this with GCC,
you can see the first statement,
it says that there's an invalid
type argument to unary star,
and the second error is it says
invalid operands to binary plus.
Well, the problem is the second
statement has many pluses.
I think there's three there.
And you don't know what it applies to.
So with Clang,
what's wonderful is the first
diagnostic is actually telling
you what the problem is.
It's saying indirection
requires a pointer operand,
and int is invalid.
So it's giving you the
type that it's confused by,
which GCC wasn't giving you.
Okay.
it is telling you exactly
what you need to know.
The second error is giving
you pinpoint control on the
plus sign you can see there.
And having the range data on all the
expressions enables us to do some really
great things with error diagnostics.
It also enables us to do a much
better job with rewriting since
the Clang ASTs have precise
information on the source code.
And I'm going to talk a little
bit more about that later.
So we're proud of this.
So now let's talk a little
bit about performance.
This project is an open source project,
Postgres SQL,
and front end times mean we're taking
the project and compiling it with Clang.
Let me be more precise.
I said compiling.
That's not exactly -- well,
let me be more precise.
So what we're doing here is we're
compiling -- if some of you are
familiar with -f syntax only,
it basically says do lexical analysis,
do preprocessing, do parsing,
do type analysis,
and build your internal data structures,
but don't generate code.
Right?
So it does all those activities.
And for gcc 4.2, it will parse,
preprocess, lexically analyze the
Postgres SQL project,
which is about 665K lines
of code in 49 seconds.
Okay?
So with Clang, we do it in 21 seconds.
So that's about a 2.3%
times faster improvement.
I want to emphasize that we are doing
the same exact thing GCC is doing.
We're trying to compete
with GCC on its turf,
so to speak.
No fancy games like I'll
be talking about later.
So here's the Xcode front end times.
Now, Xcode's a very big project.
And, um, it's
and I are going to talk
about the LLVM-gcc 4.2.
It consists of hundreds,
thousands of modules.
And gcc 4.2 compiles it in roughly
-- that translates into 16 minutes.
It's 972 seconds.
With Clang, we do it in 420 seconds or,
let's see, six minutes, right?
Seven minutes.
So,
trying to get a little improvement there.
So, seven minutes,
that saves nine minutes.
Okay?
Now, again, it's consistent.
The reason we're showing you a
C project versus an Objective-C project,
it turns out that Objective-C,
like many object-oriented languages,
the code usually contains more
type information in headers,
right?
The compilation of your program or the
parsing and preprocessing of your program
is heavily dependent on the number of
headers and the contents of the headers.
For example, in Xcode, believe it or not,
we push, like,
16 gigs -- 16 gig bytes through
the whole preprocessor and
parser when we're doing our job.
So, it's a tremendous volume of data.
And C projects, in fact,
don't have the same girth
of header information.
So, the fact that we're
scaling is quite good now.
One last point I want to make on this.
So, how do we beat GCC,
which has been around for so long,
so many people are hacking on it?
What could they be doing wrong, right?
All we're really doing is using
smart algorithms and data structures.
It sounds a little bit absurd,
but that's all we're doing.
Well, one other thing.
This is like the fourth parser
I've written in my career,
so that does account for something,
right?
We have experience with this.
We've seen mistakes.
Chris and I, the team,
we've seen different compilers,
and we've learned from them.
So this is -- it's
something that -- I mean,
I can trivialize by saying it's
smart algorithms and data structures,
but there is a lot of experience
we've gained through the years,
and we're benefiting from it.
So now I'm going to move from
time and talk about architecture.
What I have here is a diagram
of Xcode's architecture today.
And it's very high level.
But the idea here is the Xcode IDE has
a built-in preprocessor parser for C,
Objective-C, and C++.
And that built-in machinery enables
the IDE to do things like code sense,
indexing, refactoring.
That infrastructure does not
know how to do code generation.
So when you ask Xcode to build,
it's delegating the code generation,
so to speak, to GCC.
GCC is a Unix command line tool.
When you run it with a source file,
if you run it on three files,
it forgets what it did the previous time,
right?
It's a batch compiler where it
will run and forget what it did,
run and forget what it did, and so on.
On the other hand,
the built-in preprocessor actually
has some interesting optimizations
for basically caching headers
and doing other interesting
optimizations because it's running
in process and does not live and die,
live and die as a batch compiler does.
So what's wrong with the picture?
The problem is we're parsing twice,
right?
The built-in parser is parsing,
then GCC is parsing.
And it's error prone, right?
Considering this architecture, again,
Xcode does a remarkable job.
And since I've been involved
in it from its inception,
I'm the last person that's going
to stand up here and belittle
our wonderful tool called Xcode.
However, it could be doing a lot more,
and I'm going to talk about
that in the coming slide.
It basically leads to compromises, okay?
For example, if you're going to use a lot
If you are trying to find a symbol
in Xcode and you can't find a symbol,
but your code compiles with GCC,
right there is a huge disconnect.
It's like, my code compiles,
how come it can't find a symbol?
Well, the answer is this architecture.
Because, for example,
getting two preprocessors
to agree on exactly the same
input is actually really hard.
It's extremely hard.
And so the duplication of effort
leads to bugs and it leads to
considerable engineering effort.
As you know, we just added blocks.
Well, we prototype blocks in Clang.
We wanted to make sure we got them
right before we wrestled with GCC.
And it would be great to live
in a world where we could just
basically add our features to Clang.
Because as you've noticed,
we've been doing a lot
more with Objective-C over
the past couple of years.
We've added garbage collection,
properties, now we're doing blocks.
There's a lot of interesting
work going on there.
And we don't want to have to modify three
or four or five compilers to do our job.
So the vision here is that we have
an efficient implementation here
that uses Clang that will directly
generate code from within the IDE.
No need to parse twice in process.
We can do many things here.
We can cache files.
We can cache tokens.
We can cache abstract syntax trees,
which leads to a much more
incremental development environment.
So the excitement we have
here is really significant,
and we hope to deliver
some of this next WWDC.
Again, the unified parser will
give us fewer bugs,
and it will greatly simplify our
life in making language changes,
which to some degree
doesn't affect you guys.
But if we're going to move quickly and
implement the features all of you desire,
it is important to basically make
our lives easy and simplify our life.
And we don't like wrestling with GCC.
So we're using this quite extensively
for several internal projects.
People are really happy with
what they're seeing so far.
We're actively fixing bugs.
We have some wonderful people
in the open source community
that have been helping us.
I'm just wildly impressed with
the quality of people that have
been attracted to the project.
Some very talented people in
universities have gathered around.
And we're thrilled with the progress.
C99 and Objective-C are shaping up well.
As I said,
Clang basically parses all of Xcode.
And Xcode is one of the more challenging
Objective-C programs on the planet.
There were several things that
I had to fix in Clang that I didn't
even know existed in the language.
And since I've been
involved from the beginning,
that's pretty interesting.
And some of them are bad,
and we're filing bugs
against GCC in some cases.
But again, we're going to be bug for
bug compatible if it's going
to be a drop in replacement.
So anyway, C++ is under development.
It's still very early.
Again, we have some excellent people
across the globe who are helping us.
And we really sense that this is the time
to have something great and replace GCC.
And we hope you agree.
So with that, I'm going to bring up an
extremely talented person
who works with us on this,
Ted Kremenek.
Hi, everyone.
So we're very excited about Clang,
and I think Steve put it very eloquently.
So in this last part of this session,
I'm going to be talking
about other applications that
we have in mind for Clang,
besides it just being
the basis of a great C,
Objective-C, C++, and if it wasn't clear,
also Objective-C++ compiler.
So the things I'm going to be
talking about really tie into
our vision of innovations,
features we want to
put into Xcode one day.
But in the general sense,
this really speaks to our belief that
Clang just provides a strong foundation
for building great programming tools.
And this is something we think that will
continue to happen in the Clang space,
and so we're very excited about it.
The only caveat I want to say
is a lot of these things that
we're going to talk about,
think of them as more
as speculative ideas,
crazy ideas that we have on the table
that we're actively thinking about,
but they're not necessarily
immediate feature promises.
So, on to the first crazy idea.
As Steve said, faster compilation is the
primary goal of Clang.
And once you move Clang into
Xcode using the same front-end
technology used by the compiler,
essentially the difference
between the command line compiler
and the IDE just vaporizes.
And there's just a ton of
optimizations you can do in this space,
and Steve actually
mentioned several of them.
Now, Xcode has this feature today
called predictive compilation.
It allows it to fire off to GCC in
the background while you're still
editing your code to try and compile
files that have recently changed,
so by the time you hit build and go,
hopefully most of the work
has already been done.
But if we move over to Clang,
there's a lot more we
can do in this space.
Essentially,
we can incrementally reparse your files,
building up the same data structures that
a command line compiler would build up.
So at any point in time,
we're ready to go and generate new code.
And so not only can you just
speed up recompiling individual
files that have changed,
but we can potentially do things like
only recompile the functions or the
methods that have actually changed,
since Xcode will have cached all the
information from its previous builds.
And this alone will lead
to tremendous performance
increases when we're compiling.
So the second thing that we're really
thinking about is just making a
better user experience within Xcode.
And if you're familiar with it,
there's this great
feature called CodeSense,
and we also do indexing.
So it allows you to do
things like auto-completion.
You're typing a function
that you want to call,
and Xcode gives you a suggestion
of what function to use.
And also you can do things like jump to
definitions of a function or a method.
So this very quick
navigation of your code.
The problem is that whether or not you're
using Xcode or Visual Studio or whatever,
we all know that the best IDEs out
there are easily confused by commonplace
language features and C-based languages,
like preprocessor macros.
And even templates are not really
handled very well by any IDE.
And the idea is if we move
Xcode over to using Clang,
if the compiler can understand it,
so can the IDE.
And then all these features will
just be able to get to the code.
And so this will just
fluidly work together.
And also all this rich source level
information will be in the IDE so we
can expound and do more interesting kind
of behavioral experiences in the IDE.
And our hope is with this we
can make Xcode the best IDE on
the planet for editing C,
C++, and Objective-C.
Now the third thing I want
to talk about is refactoring.
Refactoring is a technology
that's in Xcode today,
and we're very happy about it.
Now if you're not familiar
with what refactoring is,
it's essentially harnessing the ID's
knowledge of your entire code base
to do high level structural edits.
So it could be things like renaming
variables across a whole project,
or moving an instant variable
from a class to its parent class,
splitting classes apart,
extracting functions
from a piece of code.
So a lot of these kinds of
evolutionary kind of design
changes that you would want to do,
that could be error prone
or tedious to do by hand.
So it's great if the
tools can do this for us.
Now the problem is that refactoring
tools basically use the same
front end technology as the
IDE that they're housed in.
And so if the IDE doesn't
understand the code,
neither will the refactoring tool.
And the refactoring tool
is going to edit your code.
It's going to go make suggestions
of how the code should be changed.
And if it doesn't understand your code,
it's going to go make suggestions
of how the code should be changed.
And if it doesn't understand your code,
it's going to go make suggestions
of how the code should be changed.
So if the IDE doesn't
understand your code,
the transformations aren't
necessarily guaranteed to be accurate.
And they're not necessarily
guaranteed to be complete.
And we provide a user interface
with our refactoring tool to try
and deal with the case that it's not
necessarily going to be 100% accurate.
And that you make the
changes that you want to do.
But on an aside,
it's just basically if our
refactoring technology can't
understand the code perfectly,
it also prohibits us from
doing a lot of transformations
that we could otherwise do.
So along with moving
Xcode over to using Clang,
we'd like to move all of our refactoring
technology over to using Clang as well.
And this is going to buy us two things.
More accuracy with our transformations.
This is going to enable more
refactoring opportunities as well.
And we want it to be very scalable.
Clang is designed to be very
fast and memory efficient.
And so we'd like to do
transformations that operate
at the speed of your thought.
That have millions or even thousands
or millions of lines of code.
of lines of code in
seconds or milliseconds.
Now the last thing that I want
to talk about is a feature
that is not in Xcode today.
We have refactoring, we have indexing,
code sense, and we do a fair amount
of predictive compilation.
The last feature is something that we
are actively investing interest in,
and that's automatic bug
finding using static analysis.
Now, if you're not familiar
with static analysis is,
I'm going to take a
broader picture first.
And that is,
wouldn't it be great if the IDE was more
than just a great editing environment?
What if it could help you be very
proactive about trying to make your
code better before you even run it?
Chris Latten, Devang Patel, Steve Naroff,
Ted Kremenek Now, if you're not familiar
with static analysis is,
I'm going to take a
broader picture first.
And that is,
wouldn't it be great if the IDE was more
than just a great editing environment?
What if it could help you be very
proactive about trying to make your
code better before you even run it?
Now we're already familiar with compilers
providing us some kind of feedback
in the form of compile time warnings.
And so these go beyond compile
time errors where your code
just doesn't compile at all.
These are suggestions of I see something
in your code that looks kind of dubious,
and if you were to run it,
I think something wrong would happen.
So here's an actual diagnostic from
the commit Clang command line driver
indicating a format string specifier in
this call to printf that's just wrong.
It's bogus.
It will result in unpleasant
behavior at runtime.
And GCC also emits a
similar kind of diagnostic.
And the real power of these kinds
of warnings is that they're cheap,
they can happen as you're
compiling your code,
or we can proactively check
for these things once Clang
is integrated into Xcode.
And they're really effective at reducing
the number of bugs in your program.
But we can go a lot further than this.
There has been a lot of work in this
area called static analysis where
essentially instead of finding a bug
that occurs on a particular statement,
like in the case of this example,
we can find bugs that require a very
specific set of events to happen.
So a certain set of
branches have to be taken.
A specific path through your code has
to be taken in order for a bug to occur.
And the real awesome feature of
this is essentially you're trading
CPU time for checking out your program.
You know, so this is maybe idle time
actually while you're editing.
And you're editing your code.
So these are free cycles
that are available for use.
And it really complements the
traditional ways in which we try to
do quality assurance on our code,
such as testing.
Because the compiler basically has
an inexhaustible attention to detail.
It's fine to just crank
away at your code,
reason about all the different
ways that it could be exercised
in order to find those corner
cases in which bugs could occur.
So I'm going to give you a
flavor of a few bugs that we
can find with static analysis.
This is really just
the tip of the iceberg.
These are very simple examples,
obviously,
for the purpose of presentation.
There's a lot more we can do.
So this is a mockup of a real
bug found in Xcode using static
analysis technology built on Clang.
So it involves this switch statement
where there's several cases where
on each case the value of str is
assigned a separate string literal.
So this is like a dispatch
on some enumeration value.
And the diagnostic emitted by
the static analysis tool is,
hey, I see that this value that
you stored to str is just,
it's never read later.
And what happens is that there's
a missing break statement
between case 1 and case 2.
And what happens is str
is just overwritten,
so case 1 always looks like case 2.
Having a missing break statement,
not having a break statement,
is not a crime in itself.
There's real reasons why you'd want to
structure your control flow that way.
But logically, semantically,
this is not what the programmer wanted.
They have dead code here
that just-- it's meaningless.
And so by reasoning about the
logical inconsistency of the program,
we can pinpoint some very
interesting bugs in this way.
And this particular
check for dead stores,
we found a lot of interesting
bugs in many of our software.
So the other class of bugs
which I think really hit home to
almost everybody is memory leaks.
So whether or not you're writing
an app that uses garbage collection
or doesn't use garbage collection,
any real program has to do some
amount of manual resource management.
So it could be dynamically
allocated memory,
it could be files that you open, sockets,
you know, whatever.
There are always things that we have to
manually manage despite having maybe a
magic garbage collector to come around
and clean up some of our unused memory.
And I think static analysis can go a long
way to catching misuses of resources,
leaks, using a resource after
it's no longer available,
because we tend to use these
resources in very stylistic,
idiomatic ways.
So this particular example involves
some objective C code that I mocked up.
It involves allocating
an object at the top,
an NSMutable dictionary object,
then we decal some method,
and then on some error condition we go,
oh, well, I don't know what to do,
so I'm going to return.
And therefore there's actually a
leak here because the reference
count associated with the dict
object isn't actually decremented.
So if you're not familiar with
this idiom in objective C,
these are reference counted objects.
And so this kind of error -- you have
to correctly use retain and release in
order to manage the reference counts.
But because we use retain and release,
we're not going to be able
to get the reference counts.
So if we use retain and
release very stylistically,
it's very easy for
static analysis to catch.
And you can imagine the same
kind of checking could apply
to things like new and delete,
malloc and free and so forth.
So I think there's a lot of kind of
memory leaks and other related bugs
we can find with static analysis.
And that's just the start.
I think there's a lot of
things that we can check.
Security bugs, API rules, crashes,
assertion failures, data races.
There's a lot of opportunities
for static analysis to greatly
improve the quality of our code.
So there are a few design goals
that we have in place for building
a tool that would be useful for you.
The first one is usability.
The problem is that bugs in the real
world can actually be fairly complex.
They can require a convoluted path
through your code to actually trigger.
The one thing about Clang is we have
very rich source level information.
And this is going to enable
us to give very precise
diagnostic about in this file,
at this line,
maybe even within this macro expansion,
something bad happened,
pinpoint you to directly
where the problem occurs.
Now the other problem is that some bugs
found by static analysis aren't real.
I think the notorious term
here is false positives.
The problem is that static analysis
is reasoning about complex runtime
behavior without running your program.
And so it's just not perfect.
Our design goal is to address this
by trying to have as few number
of false positives as possible,
because otherwise the
tool is just useless.
If you just get too much noise,
you don't want to invest any
time in using the tool at all.
Now the second thing
is Objective-C support.
Clang supports Objective-C, C,
and eventually C++.
So anything that Clang supports,
the static analysis
technology I'm talking about,
should also support it as well.
The Mac and the iPhone,
Objective-C is the language
to build applications.
And so we're really interested in
having strong support for Objective-C.
And there's no other static
analysis tool out there that
has any support for Objective-C.
Now,
Objective-C is a highly dynamic language.
This is not necessarily --
this is not really going to be
a problem for static analysis.
The things that we're mainly concerned
with is that we have these huge APIs.
You're using them to develop apps.
We think we can systematically enforce
a lot of the rules involved with
those APIs by using static analysis.
So as you are typing your code,
you can be less concerned that you're
just doing the wrong thing because
you don't know some hidden rule.
The static analysis can be there
to try and enforce those hidden
rules that you don't know about.
And these can be things from, you know,
very complicated rules that you
must call one method after another,
to even very simple rules that
you can't really know about.
things such as you should never
pass nil to a particular method.
The other thing we're very concerned
about is memory management errors.
The phone is all reference counted.
There's no garbage collection there.
And even if you use garbage
collection on the Mac,
there's some special rules you must
obey in order for the garbage collector
to work correctly with your code.
And so we think we can enforce
a lot of these rules using
static analysis as well.
So where are we now today with this?
This isn't vapor.
We've made a strong initial investment
in static analysis based on Clang.
It's probably one of the biggest
applications we've developed so far.
We're actively researching
and developing it.
We actually have an alpha,
maybe beta quality memory leak
checker for foundation objects.
So that retain release bug,
that's an actual diagnostic that
would be emitted by the tool.
And we've used it and
found and fixed bugs.
In the phone, in Xcode itself,
in the Mac OS X kernel,
and various frameworks that
we have available at Apple.
So you already are benefiting from
the effects of this technology.
Now while we're not
shipping it today in Xcode,
it's not available at
developer.apple.com.
It is, like the rest of Clang,
100% open source.
And you can download and try it out today
if you wish by going to clang.llvm.org.
The only caveat is this is
a very early stage tool.
So that's it.
So we talked about a lot of things today.
We talked about what LLVM is.
And we talked about what
we're delivering to you,
what's built on LLVM.
The Vang talked about LLVM GCC and how
it's a truly awesome standalone compiler.
It can give you both faster
compiles on much of your code,
and we think it's going to
generate much faster executables
for many real workloads.
You need to try it out to really
measure its benefits to you,
but you can easily try it out within
Xcode from the drag down option,
just like the compiler you're using,
or you can use it from the command
line from developer user bin LLVM GCC.
Steve talked about Clang,
this vision for this new
C front end that we're building.
It's more than vision.
We have a really active code base,
and we can parse almost
all of C and Objective C.
We're actively developing it still.
There's a rich developer
community around it,
and we're very excited about
the new kind of tools it's
going to enable us to build.
Better refactoring, static analysis,
and most importantly, a better Xcode.
And the great thing is all
of this is open source.
The LLVM project you can
visit by going to LLVM.org,
and Clang has a specific project for
more information at clang.llvm.org.
And if you have other specific questions,
please contact Michael Jurowicz,
our developer tools evangelist.
He's also here to answer other
specific questions if you want about
this session and related material.